---
project: "[[My Body is Not the Project]]"
---
## Reflections on control and beauty


## Beauty and me
The people I meet, the people I know, the people I love, their bodies suit them. Their faces match their voices, mannerisms, personality. The way a nose sticks out, eyes squinting while smiling, legs displaying a whole network of brilliant blue veins. Fat and skin making a boundary between us. To me, their bodies are physical manifestations of their souls. To me they look correct, like there could be no other option. Though flawed in their own uniquely universal human ways, to me they are perfect. Familiarity has rendered them all breathtakingly beautiful. 

I wish I could afford myself the same grace.

The body I was born in does not feel correct. Since sentience, it has felt less like a manifestation of my core being, and more like a set of disparate parts, masquerading as a joint endeavour. Starting with the inciting incident of insecurity–my large thighs, and moving through a bastardized body scan of self-disgust–my large, long-toed feet, my thick ankles, my slim calves that only accentuated the thick thighs without the mysticized 'gap' I so desired, my stomach–belly button pulled taught horizontally, the roll of fat that unbenounced to me allowed me admission into womanhood, the 'chicken wings' between my chest and arms, or moving further to the arms themselves, I cruelly likened to mixed meat sausages, my large, thick-fingered hands, or maybe going back to my breats (or lack thereof), unusually broad shoulders, soft, undefined jawline, square-shaped face with the small lips but ample cheek chub, the large forehead, often speckled with acne, and the unruly curly hair making me appear chronically electrocuted. My interface to experience was never without fault, meaning my experience itself felt fundamentally flawed in some indescribable way.

As a girl, I couldn't help but notice how petite, how feminine, my peers were with their small bodies and straight hair and pretty faces, and how much they embodied my aspirations. They were delicate, a word my large frame and strong limbs could never achieve. In dance classes, my makeup sheet demanded straight hair slicked back with "no flyaways" that, with my hair, no amount of gel could achieve, not to mention the skin-tight costumes that only reinforced my habit of sucking in my stomach at all times. I was always, as Naomi Wolf coins in her manifesto against female beauty standards, The Beauty Myth, an "aspiring woman"–feeling as though my identity could only be secured by external sources and learned behaviours. I was not a correct woman by default and beauty was something "out there," ephemeral and distant, that I could never quite reach. I never lived up to an ideal femininity, so eventually, disheartened and wishing to avoid further embarrassment, I rejected it. You can't fire me, I quit. 

As long as I'd been alive, my mother didn't wear makeup, so this was the obvious first site of rebellion. Further declarations were that I would never pluck my eyebrows or dye my hair–the moral implications of these treated as severe in my mind as acts of betrayal. When I had to wear makeup once a year at dance recitals, I made it abundantly clear that I had no intention of ever wearing it again, because it was proof of brainless conformity. Outwardly I projected my beliefs that to conform to a standard of beauty was to give in to the pressure of what others think and expect. Inwardly, I believed that even if I did conform to every norm of feminine grooming and presentation, I would not be a correct woman. It's not that makeup wasn't secretly, in a darkest, guiltiest part of myself, fun. Never mind that I put on mascara and eyeliner and blush late at night after everyone else was asleep, or when I was home alone, prancing around imagining myself as a real woman. A beautiful one. No, makeup was another proof of my incompetence at womanhood, and it's not as embarrassing if you aren't trying, so try I did not. In fact, any aesthetic focus was innately shameful. 'How dare you think you're worth looking at? Worth investing energy into?' Or worse yet, 'why do you think it matters to be beautiful?' Trying to mediate my appearance would be evidence of my trying and failing to achieve a goal shameful in itself.

Of course, the issue with such extreme notions of moral judgment and aesthetic conformity, is it's just as limiting as the standards it fights against. One set of rules told me to be thin and delicate, to wear makeup and dresses and high heels, the other to resist any kind of feminine presentation and just embrace being boyish in shape, size and demeanour. In adolescence I felt genuinely confined by my past proclamations, and began doing the treasonous acts of plucking my eyebrows and wearing makeup–but don't worry, not too much or too often, god forbid. Normalcy felt, and still feels, like a big deal to me. Small things like wearing eyeshadow or mascara to school seemed unimaginably embarrassing. I don't want to let on to others that I care, and what worse way to conceal your values then investing in such a purposeless pursuit as beauty? But to me, it wasn't purposeless. When I put on my first pair of high heels, after apologizing to my mother who never wore heels and saw no value in them, I felt genuinely powerful. I felt grown up. I felt, for maybe a brief moment, beautiful. In my childhood I enjoyed dressing up in colourful clothes, necklaces, hats and bracelets, marching around the house a thrift shop of clashing patterns and textures. Is it possible that there was an innate component? That it wasn't all programmed into me by a culture I didn't agree with? Did I have to throw it all away?

My relationship with femininity and womanhood only grew more complex as I grew into adulthood. I came home after the second day I went to high school with eyeshadow on, a random Thursday in March, and never went back because of the Covid pandemic. The isolation I experienced during that two years stripped me of my sense of self as a being, let alone my sense of value in my physical appearance. Shifting to digital means of communication only accentuated my insecurities by forcing me to look at myself all day during zoom courses, and telegenic friend hangouts. My people watching became scrolling through Instagram explorer, comparing myself to every female body in eyesight. The prediction algorithm did it's magic and soon all I saw was ads for beauty products, clothes, and an endless stream of bodies so beautiful they felt like an act of violence against my own. In a period of identity diffusion, my physical identity hit it's lowest point when I hard pivoted from an aimlessness-fuelled borderline binge eating disorder to a genuine case of anorexia nervosa. My life was out of control and I wanted so desperately to exert mastery over something. Considering my lifelong obsession with beauty, the body was the obvious site of rebellion. My body became my project.

## Entanglement
Since childhood I have been obsessed with beauty. My parents tell my a story of me at age two, making a wildflower arrangement and already displaying a strong taste for what kind of flowers I preferred, and which were unacceptable. At that age I also loved dressing up in colourful clothes, jewellery, and accessories. Growing up I was devastated by things nobody else seemed to notice – a particularly beautiful sunset, a passionate lovesong, an oil painting, a flock of migrating geese flying overhead, a ladybug landing on my pinky finger, the mountains we are blessed with in Metro Vancouver with a new dusting of snow, and especially, beautiful women. Naturally, I was a prolific artist, translating my worship of beauty into paintings and drawings of almost exclusively beautiful girls. I knew what traits made my brain light up – what I was supposed to be – and if I couldn't have them myself I could at least add them to the world in another way to make up for my deficiencies. Even today, I am a visual designer, in an endless pursuit to make the mundane beautiful, living for the high of the singing solved puzzle – what I call a finished work. Making chaos into order, making things beautiful, they're really the same thing.

How did this happen and where does beauty come from? How did I know at 8 years old that my legs were too big to be beautiful? At the risk of sounding painfully obvious, the standards we abide by come from the media we consume. Think of your brain like a machine-learning algorithm you are training with your every action (because it is and you are). It's outputs are made of its inputs. In The Body, a book following the history of nude photography for oppression and expression, William A. Ewing states that physical normalcy only came to be after photography enabled the documentation and categorization of a population. (Ewing, 1994). Without a standard to compare yourself to, you just are normal. Wolf also notes that beauty standards as we know today are only a couple hundred years old, with the proliferation of photographs lining up with the creation of the beauty myth – her name for the standards of beauty that keep women oppressed, unempowered and most dangerously, distracted (Wolf, 1991). 

Something I learned in a social psychology course is that we base our actions on the actions of others, especially in times of uncertainty – it's called informational social influence and it's why your first reaction when you hear a fire alarm is to look around at what everyone else is doing before evacuating. In the basic, unconscious process of translating entropy into order – understanding the world – we absorb the thoughts and beliefs of others to structure our own framework of categorizing reality, called schemas. If we are exposed to a media landscape vying for attention by increasingly extreme depictions of success and moral goodness as beauty, characterized by a curvy but thin woman of impossible proportions without fat or acne – the vision of delicate femininity, she becomes normal and it is us that are incorrect. Being unbeautiful becomes a personal flaw, solved luckily by the very thing the prodigal woman is selling.
## Nature or Nurture?
As much as I can confidently blame the amorphous 'media' for beauty standards, the media was made by people, so where did their values come from? On one hand, I can treat the contemporary aspiration for beauty as a case of classical conditioning, wherein a neutral stimulus, beauty, is paired with a stimulus causing a natural response, social acceptance. In this way, we might learn to value beauty because what it provides us, and what we see it can provide others. Looking at celebrities, or social media influencers is a good example of this, they are beautiful people with the most quantified social capital. On the other hand, beauty could be an innate value that is reinforced by social inclusion and moral judgment, a case of operant conditioning. In his book Clean on tracing the history of the modern notion of cleanliness, James Hamblin proposes a natural, inborn desire for beauty for beauty's sake. (Hamblin, 2020) Beauty is order and predictability – so perhaps it's just an extension of our brain's desire to simplify the world of perception. 

In an Indigenous Studies course I learned that Indigenous groups in what is now called North America had no notion of art – a beautiful but useless object – instead taking great care and effort to make all functional objects beautiful. This effort was justified based on respect for the resources that became a functional object, and because beauty was seen as "good for the soul." (cite). 

What about beauty as self expression? Contemporary self expression is characterized by a kind of hypercommercialized 




## But I'm Smart
Even though intellectually, I know that 



## Self control is a dangerous thing

## What do you do with it?

## Enlightenment
