---
created: 2023-12-30
status: 🔴
tags:
  - input
  - input/book
  - philosophy
  - art
links: "[[My Inputs]]"
author: R.G. Collingwood
---
## Summary

### Context
- Manifesto on the criteria and kinds of art by R.G. Collingwood.
### Main Takeaways
- 
### Questions/Connections/Thoughts
- 
## Notes
- Colingwood starts by defining art "Ars in ancient Latin, like Greek, means something quite different. It means a craft or specialized form of skill, like carpentry or smithying or surgery. The Greeks and Romans had no conception of what we call art as something different from craft." (p5). 
- [[If people have no word for a certain kind of thing, it is because they are not aware of it as a distinct kind.]] (p6)
- Ars in medieval Latin, like 'art' in the early modern English which borrowed both word and sense, meant any special form of book-learning, such as grammar or logic, magic or astrology. (p6). 
- "In the late eighteenth century the disentanglement had gone so far as to establish a distinction between the fine arts and the useful arts; where 'fine' arts meant, not delicate or highly skilled arts, but 'beautiful' arts. (p6).
- Collingwood explains that the word 'state' originally meant "the new secularized political consciousness of the modern world" (p8) in Italy, whereas due to the convergence of religion and state in Greek society, there was no word for an equivalent concept. "We have no words for such a thing, because we do not possess the thing. When we use for it words like 'state', 'political' and so forth, we are using them not in their proper sense, but in an analogical sense." (p8). *Interesting how language limits understanding/creates the initial worldview framework that all subsequent understanding is built upon. It also means that people speaking a different language can never truly understand another culture because language is a dimension of understanding that can't be tried on.*
- "All modern theories of art insist that what a work of art is for is to be thus contemplated." (p10)
- Collingwood asserts that the resemblance to other works of art is not what makes something art, "[[The resemblance is superficial; what matters is the purpose.]]" (p10). 
- What Greeks called Ars, defined as "the power to produce a preconceived result by means of consciously controlled and directed action" (p15), Collingwood calls craft. Craft is technique applied to reach an end, where the product is the end.
- In Craft, "[[When the ends exist, the means have ceased to exist.]]" (p15).
- Another distinguishing factor between art and craft is that "the craftsman knows what he wants to make before he makes it. This foreknowledge is absolutely indispensable to craft." (p16). To contrast, Collingwood explains the artistic process by contrast in which "[[The artist has no idea what the experience is which demands expression until he has expressed it]]" (p29). 
- Collingwood explains the purpose and ultimate goal of craft, "the cobbler or carpenter or weaver is not simply trying to produce shoes or carts or cloth. [[Content is made to meet a demand]]" (p18). *Content versus art, art you make because you have to, content you make because people will consume it.*
- Collingwood differentiates art and craft by the means of which they are made. Craft starts with tangible means that are converted to a product, whereas the means of art are not as clearly transformed or exhausted/diminished by its creation. "The words which occur in the poem were never before his mind as a whole in an order different from that of the poem, out of which he shuffled them till the poem, as we have it, appeared." (p23). He also considers the emotion that is converted or channeled into the art as a sort of means, but again, one that is not exhaustible by the creation of art. *In fact, the creation of art probably makes you feel more emotions, so in a way it's a sustainable endeavour.*
- "In every work of art there is something which, in some sense of the word, may be called form. There is, to be more precise, something in the nature of rhythm, pattern, organization, design or structure. But it does not follow that there is a distinction between form and matter. Where that distinction does exist, namely, in artifacts, the matter was there in the shape of raw material before the form was imposed upon it, and the form was there in the shape of a preconceived plan before being imposed upon the matter; and the two coexist in the finished product." (p23-24).
- "There is in art, nothing which resembles the hierarchy of crafts" (p25), as in the separation of raw materials (means), effort and technique, and finished product. Art is a cycle that loops back on itself without clear steps.
- A defining feature of art is the "[[Enlargement of experience]]" (p27). 
- Collingwood defines the kinds of pseudo-art: amusement, "where an emotion is aroused for its own sake, as an enjoyable experience", magic, where an emotion is aroused for "the sake of its practical value", puzzle, where"intellectual faculties are stimulated for the mere sake of their exercise", instruction, where emotion or intellection are aroused "for the mere sake of knowing this or that thing", advertisement, where "a certain practical activity is stimulated as expedient", and exhortation, "propaganda; where it is stimulated as right." (p32).
- Collingwood rejects Oscar Wilde's quote that "all art is quite useless" (p32) as a definition of art. He counters that a better statement would be "what makes it art is not the same as what makes it useful." (p32). He goes on to assert that the eliciting of an emotional reaction, or intent of psychological response is also not enough to call something art.
- Collingwood explains that pseudo-art is really art highjacked for a purpose or to serve an agenda: "these various kinds of pseudo-art are in reality various kinds of use to which art may be put. In order that any of these purposes may be realized, there must first be art, and then a subordination of art to some utilitarian end. Unless a man can write, he cannot write propaganda." (p33). He continues, that first the art for its own sake is created, "then this independent and self-sufficient art is broken, as it were, to the plough, forced aside from its own original nature and enslaved to the service of an end not its own. Here lies the particular tragedy of the artist's position in the modern world. He is heir to a tradition from which he has learn what art should be; or at least, what it cannot be. He has heard its call and devoted himself to its service. And then, when the time comes for him to demand of society that it should support him in return for his devotion to a purpose which, after all, is not his private purpose but one among the purposes of modern civilization, he finds that his living is guaranteed only on condition that he renounces his calling and uses the art which he has acquired in a way which negates its fundamental nature, by turning journalist or advertisement artist or the like; a degradation far more frightful than the prostitution or enslavement of the mere body." (p33-34). *Reminds me of Design, or Content. Using the creative flame nurtured in childhood for cold and industrial means because it's better than the alternative of prostituting your body through labour or repetitive jobs requiring little creativity. Intellectual prostitution as a larger sacrifice is an interesting statement.*
- "If art is art only so far as it stimulates certain reactions, the artist as such is simply a purveyor of drugs, noxious and wholesome; what we call works of art are nothing but a section of the Pharmacopoeia." (p34). 
- Collingwood attempts to separate 'Art' from tangible products, "we must disabuse ourselves of the notion that the business of an artist consists in producing a special kind of artifacts, so-called 'works of art' or objets d'art, which are bodily and perceptible things." (p37). Collingwood goes on to define art as two elements. "Primarily, it is an 'internal' or 'mental' thing, something (as we commonly say), 'existing in his head' and there only: something of the kind which we commonly call an experience. Secondarily, it is a bodily or perceptible thing (a picture, statue...) whose exact relation to this 'mental' thing will need very careful definition." (p37). Collingwood acknowledges that the mental piece is not what is usually regarded as a work of art, but as the "thing which the artist as such primarily produces" it should be considered "the work of art proper." (p37), while the making of the actual art is not requisite for an artist, "only a subsidiary activity, incidental to that. And consequently this thing is a work of art, not in its own right, but only because of the relation in which it stands to the 'mental' thing or experience of which I spoke just now. There is no such thing as an objet d'art in itself; if we call any bodily and perceptible thing by that name or an equivalent we do so only because of the relation in which it stands to the aesthetic experience which is the 'work of art proper.'" (p37). *Long quote but fascinating stuff. The art is not the implementation, that's just technique. Art is instead the way of looking at and processing the world so as to create new ideas, connections and innovations. Art as a way of being and seeing, not doing. I think this makes sense though, it just characterized art as more of a personality dimension than a tangible practice.*
- "The beauty of anything is, for him (Plato) that in which compels us to admire and desire it." (p38). The Greek word for beauty was the "proper object" (p38) of the Greek word for love. *Does love create that which is beautiful?* Collingwood explains that Plato's theory of beauty was connected more to sexual love, morals, "when action is at its highest potency" (p38) and "the theory of knowledge, as that which lures us onward in the path of philosophy, the quest for truth. To call a thing beautiful in Greek, whether ordinary or philosophical Greek, is simply to call it admirable or excellent or desirable." (p38). *Beauty as admiration, intellectual achievement and morality. Like right action.*
- Collingwood asserts "the words 'Beauty,' 'beautiful', as actually used, have no aesthetic implication... They express an attitude of admiration for a thing well done, irrespective of whether that thing is an aesthetic activity, an intellectual activity, or a bodily activity." (p39). *This is such a beautiful definition. Adopting beauty as admiration and performance dismisses the superficial hierarchy it usually enforces.* Beauty can also relate to "the satisfaction of some desire or arousing of some emotion" (p39) like how a beautiful woman means a sexually desirable one, or a beautiful day means one that is conducive to do activities.
- "Certainly we often call our fellow creatures beautiful by way of saying that we love them, and that not only sexually. The bright eyes of a mouse or the fragile vitality of a flower are things that touch us to the heart, but **they touch us with the love that life feels for life**, not with judgment of their aesthetic excellence." (p39-40).
- "We ought not, they say, to call a grilled steak beautiful. But why not? Because they want us to let them monopolize the word for their own purposes." (p40). 
- "The word 'Beauty', wherever and however it is used, connotes that in things by virtue of which we love them, admire them, or desire them." (p40). *Even if not aesthetic, beauty as statement of value.*
### 3. Art and Representation
- "If art proper is not any kind of craft, it cannot be representative. For representation is a matter of skill, a craft of a special kind." (p42). 
- Collingwood explains that creating 'art' for profit or commission is not true art through the example of a portrait painter, "he must first of all be an artist before he can subordinate his artistic powers to the end of portraiture. Where the subordination is complete, the portrait-painter has satisfied his patron's demands for a good likeness, but has sacrificed his life as an artist in doing so. Thus a commercial portrait, such as most of those one sees on the walls of exhibitions, is in one sense a work of art and in one sense not a work of art: it is a work of art in which are artistic motives are genuinely present, but denatured by subordination to a non-artistic end, the end of representation." (p44-45). *True of design also, there is an artistic spark there but exploited to further a capitalist agenda.*
- Collingwood explains that Plato's statement against poetry is often misconstrued as a rejection of art, when in reality it is a rejection of representation, or "poetry for pleasure's sake." (p49). 
- Collingwood explains that Plato considers tragedy a detriment to society, as it "generates in the audience emotions of pity and fear." (p51). Aristotle disagrees by considering how negative emotions are "discharged in the experience of watching the tragedy. This emotional defecation or 'purging' leaves the audience's mind, after the tragedy is over, not loaded with pity and fear, but lightened of them." (p51). 
- "The true definition of representative art is not that an artifact resembles a original, but that the feeling evoked by the artifact resembles the feeling evoked by the original." (p53). 
- "People and things look different to us according to the emotion we feel in looking at them." (p54). 
- Collingwood explains that understanding and critically thinking about the intended emotional effects is what differentiates good Art. He gives the example of "reproducing the emotional effects of a ritual dance in which the dancers trace patterns on the ground. The modern traveller would photograph the dancers as they stand at a given moment. A conventional modern artist, with a mind debauched by naturalism, would draw them in the same kind of way. This would be a silly thing to do, because the emotional effect of the dance depends not on any instantaneous posture but on the traced pattern. The sensible thing would be to leave out the dancers altogether, and draw the pattern by itself." (p55). Collingwood goes on to explain that this is the premise of Celtic art based on patterns that provides, to him, a sense of "voluptuousness and terror." (p55).
- "People sometimes talk as if 'selection; were an essential part of every artist's work. This is a mistake. **In Art proper there is no such thing; the artist draws what he sees, expresses what he feels, makes a clean breast of his experiences, concealing nothing and altering nothing.**" (p56). *!!!!!! This is me with my music. If it's not exactly honest than you're writing about nothing and it's just slop. What differentiates each person is out unique experience. That is what we can give to the world.*
